---
layout: post
title:  "Color palette"
date:   2024-06-06 02:40:00 +0300
categories: graphics
---

The video hardware has a hardwired 8-bit palette that could best be
described as RrGgBbIi. This means that two bits each are assigned to the
red, green and blue color channels individually, and the remaining two
bits are intensity bits that affect all three color channels at the same
time. The letters in RrGgBbIi stand for those bits with R/r for red, G/g
for green, B/b for blue and I/i for intensity, where capital letters
stand for the more significant bits. Each color channel has a 4-bit R2R
DAC that converts two color and two intensity bits to an analog value.
The 4-bit value that is fed into the DAC is constructed with the
intensity bits interleaved between the color bits, resulting in the
following arrangement for each color channel:

| Color	| Value	|
| ----- | ----- |
| Red	| RIri	|
| Green	| GIgi	|
| Blue	| BIbi	|

This palette has some strenghts as well as some weaknesses. With only 256
colors available, a compromise has to be made somewhere.

**Pros**
- 16 grayscale values
- Variety of light and dark colors available
- Superset of the commonly used RGBI 16 color scheme
- Fast and lossless conversion to RGB24 possible (for emulation)

**Cons**
- Very limited options for orange
- Hard to match diferrent hues with the same saturation and brightness

Most of this is a direct consequence of all channels being treated
equally, while the human eye is more sensitive in the green, and less so
in the red part of the color spectrum with blue being a lot less
sensitive. This results in colors that look the same numerically, with
just the bits swapped between channels, ending up to be perceived as
different in brightness. Any adjustment for compensation also affects hue
or saturation in most situations. Nevertheless, this palette was chosen
for its simplicity and numerical symmetry, leaving the problem of
choosing a matching set of colors from within this palette as an
interesting challenge for later.


## Available colors by hue

There are some colors that have no hue, because the Rr, Gg and Bb bits are
identical, yielding a grayscale palette of 16 colors:

| Brightness	| R=G=B	| I	| r=g=b	| i	| Hex	| Color	|
| ---------:	| ----:	| -:	| -:	| -:	| ---	| -----	|
| 0		| 0	| 0	| 0	| 0	| 0x00	|<span style="display:inline-block;vertical-align:middle;width:1lh;height:1lh;background:#000"></span> #000	|
| 1		| 0	| 0	| 0	| 1	| 0x01	|<span style="display:inline-block;vertical-align:middle;width:1lh;height:1lh;background:#111"></span> #111	|
| 2		| 0	| 0	| 1	| 0	| 0x54	|<span style="display:inline-block;vertical-align:middle;width:1lh;height:1lh;background:#222"></span> #222	|
| 3		| 0	| 0	| 1	| 1	| 0x55	|<span style="display:inline-block;vertical-align:middle;width:1lh;height:1lh;background:#333"></span> #333	|
| 4		| 0	| 1	| 0	| 0	| 0x02	|<span style="display:inline-block;vertical-align:middle;width:1lh;height:1lh;background:#444"></span> #444	|
| 5		| 0	| 1	| 0	| 1	| 0x03	|<span style="display:inline-block;vertical-align:middle;width:1lh;height:1lh;background:#555"></span> #555	|
| 6		| 0	| 1	| 1	| 0	| 0x56	|<span style="display:inline-block;vertical-align:middle;width:1lh;height:1lh;background:#666"></span> #666	|
| 7		| 0	| 1	| 1	| 1	| 0x57	|<span style="display:inline-block;vertical-align:middle;width:1lh;height:1lh;background:#777"></span> #777	|
| 8		| 1	| 0	| 0	| 0	| 0xa8	|<span style="display:inline-block;vertical-align:middle;width:1lh;height:1lh;background:#888"></span> #888	|
| 9		| 1	| 0	| 0	| 1	| 0xa9	|<span style="display:inline-block;vertical-align:middle;width:1lh;height:1lh;background:#999"></span> #999	|
| 10		| 1	| 0	| 1	| 0	| 0xfc	|<span style="display:inline-block;vertical-align:middle;width:1lh;height:1lh;background:#aaa"></span> #aaa	|
| 11		| 1	| 0	| 1	| 1	| 0xfd	|<span style="display:inline-block;vertical-align:middle;width:1lh;height:1lh;background:#bbb"></span> #bbb	|
| 12		| 1	| 1	| 0	| 0	| 0xaa	|<span style="display:inline-block;vertical-align:middle;width:1lh;height:1lh;background:#ccc"></span> #ccc	|
| 13		| 1	| 1	| 0	| 1	| 0xab	|<span style="display:inline-block;vertical-align:middle;width:1lh;height:1lh;background:#ddd"></span> #ddd	|
| 14		| 1	| 1	| 1	| 0	| 0xfe	|<span style="display:inline-block;vertical-align:middle;width:1lh;height:1lh;background:#eee"></span> #eee	|
| 15		| 1	| 1	| 1	| 1	| 0xff	|<span style="display:inline-block;vertical-align:middle;width:1lh;height:1lh;background:#fff"></span> #fff	|

The remaining 240 colors can be grouped by hue. For this we look at the
relative strengths of the red green and blue channels. The intensity bits
affect all of them equally, so we can ignore them for grouping and use
them later to turn every color we find into four different shades.

The first sets of colors are found by looking for colors where one of the
channels is strongest while the other two channels have the same value.
This way we find three groups of colors with a pure hue, one for each color
channel:

**Pure red hue**

{% include_relative colorlist_red.md %}

**Pure green hue**

{% include_relative colorlist_green.md %}

**Pure blue hue**

{% include_relative colorlist_blue.md %}

Next are colors where there is a tie between two channels being the
strongest with the third one having a lower value. This yields three
groups of colors, one for cyan (green + blue), one for magenta (red +
blue) and one for yellow (red + green):

**Pure cyan hue**

{% include_relative colorlist_cyan.md %}

**Pure magenta hue**

{% include_relative colorlist_magenta.md %}

**Pure yellow hue**

{% include_relative colorlist_yellow.md %}

Now there are 96 colors left where no two channels have the same value.
They can be divided into six groups of 16 colors each, based on the order
in which the channels appear when sorting them by strength:

| Order	| Hue		|
| -----	| ---		|
| R>G>B	| Amber		|
| R>B>G	| Pink		|
| G>R>B	| Lime		|
| G>B>R	| Turqoise	|
| B>R>G	| Violet	|
| B>G>R	| Azure		|

Each of these groups contains three distinct hues. The first four colors
have the strongest channel at the lowest possible value (2), the second
strongest at 1 and the third one at 0. The second set of four colors are
the same but with the strongest channel being at a higher value (3),
shifting the hue slightly towards it, although the difference is barely
noticable. The remaining eight colors have the primary channel at the max
value (3) and the secondary value at 2, leaving two options for the third
one, which in this case does not influence hue but instead just makes the
color lighter and less saturated when set to 1.

**Amber hues**

{% include_relative colorlist_amber.md %}

**Pink hues**

{% include_relative colorlist_pink.md %}

**Lime hues**

{% include_relative colorlist_lime.md %}

**Turqoise hues**

{% include_relative colorlist_turqoise.md %}

**Violet hues**

{% include_relative colorlist_violet.md %}

**Azure hues**

{% include_relative colorlist_azure.md %}


## List of all colors in mumerical order

Here are all the colors again sorted by the byte representation used by
the video hardware together with their "modern" representation as (short)
HTML/CSS color codes for reference. Note that #fd7 for example is
shorthand for #ffdd77.

{% include_relative colorlist_all.md %}
